So I said, you just go ahead and plan on making
$10,000 worth of these one burner stoves. And I
don't care how many it is, but give us a fair shake on
it. He said, well, we'll do that. Well, hell, in
about two weeks, he said, well, it looks like we're
going to be able to make
paying for the die costs and some other costs we'll
be able to have for you about 360 or something like
that for the $10,000.
And he said additional stones after that would be,
I think, $7
or $8 or $9 a piece, something like that, on a
negotiated basis. So I told the boss about it and
told Colonel Moss about it, and he said, oh, that's
fine, that's fine. Well, then I pulled a little
shenanigans. I convinced the guys to write into
the G4 annex for the landings in North Africa that
every armored vehicle and every armored
personnel carrier and every command car have one
of these one-burner gasoline stoves for
provision of providing hot rations for the
troops. Well, after they figured out what that
would amount to based upon the T-O and E of the units
that were scheduled for the North African
operation, it amounted to some 10,000 odd units.
And to make a long story short, it wasn't very long
after that we got the authority to go ahead and buy
that many plus some more for maintenance and
follow on and so forth. And you've been a friend of
the Coleman's ever since. And then after that,
why, the one burner stove was this, about that time
Ernie Pyle, the reporter, was in North Africa. He
mentioned in one of his stories about this one
burner stove. Sheldon Coleman called me on the
phone. He said, say, Ernie Pyle has mentioned
about your one burner stove. He always referred to
it as your one burner stove. And I said, yeah.
Somebody told me. I didn't see the article. He said
the employees in the factory would like to send him
one, specially made stainless steel with his name
engraved on it and everything. Can you get it to
him? And I said, well, I'm pretty sure I can. So they
did. A beautiful one-burner stone, exact
facsimile, all fancied up with stainless steel
engraved and everything. And I got it over to him.
thanking me for. And he said, it's so pretty that
I'll never use it. I'll always just use one that I
can, a regular GI stove that I can use. And when he
was killed in the Pacific, we looked and looked and
looked to try to find that stove. But because the
Coleman Company wanted to put it on exhibit out
there perpetually. But we never, we never found
it. We contacted the unit that he was with. And I
don't know what happened to it. Somebody's got it
somewhere. But anyway, the little one burner
stove is really the, I got a great personal
satisfaction out of that little thing. Because it
served a great purpose. And really, really was
really a helpmate to a lot of people. And I got, as a
result, like you say, I was very friendly with
Coleman. And they wanted me after the war. They
offered me a hell of a fine job to go to their
Canadian operation in Montreal. And I was to be the
number two man then. And they said that the number
one man was scheduled to retire in about three
years,
But I
didn't do it. I went in the service, the regular
service. And Sheldon, it kind of upset him that I
didn't take it because he had paved a lot of streets
and paved a lot of way for me to come in at that level.
But we're still friends and good friends about it.
But it was something that we gave birth to, and
everybody was against it because we don't have a
requirement for it. And nobody wanted to stick
their neck out and say, let's accept. We finally
convinced a couple of the powers that be at that
time to go along with it. What other types of
projects did
Right about that, a little after that too, and I've
got a patent on that, we, in the shipment of
gasoline for invasion and for follow-on, the
gasoline, we need, not in the shipment, but in the
handling of gasoline in the field, even with a
pipeline operation, There's a great military
necessity for the five gallon can, jerry can.
Well, shipping those five gallon gasoline cans,
and we also had five gallon cans to carry water, but
the big requirement was for gasoline cans, five
gallon gasoline cans. And as some of our petroleum
pipeline distribution companies we would have
what we call decanting operations where at the
terminal, at the pipeline, they would have
thousands of cans that would be filled and units
would come up and pick up a truckload full of filled
cans and then bring in a truckload of empty cans.
So, shipping those cans overseas was quite a
logistic thing because what you're doing is
shipping a ship full of air because you've got
empty cans and early in the day a lot of people said,
well why don't we fill them with some kind of dry
subsistence, what kind of subsistence? Beans or
something like that and it never was very feasible
to do that. So I got the idea, let's ship the cans
knocked down but nested. In other words, ship a can
that was almost complete except for one side, put a
slight slant on the sides of the can so you could
nest them. And then the end, the top or the end, you
could stack them up. And then overseas, one of the
ordinance companies could set up a line, a welding
line, and they could assemble the finished cans.
Drop in the closure, have that all in one piece, so
just drop it in and spot weld it. The handle would
already be on it. No, the handle you could spot weld
it on. And the body of the can would be nested,
stacked up. And he then just put the top on them and
run a bead weld around it. And they already had
automatic, a little simple field expedient
machine that could run a bead weld around it. So the
idea was so good that the military patented the
thing in my name for their exclusive use. And for
any commercial use after the military didn't want
it, it would become my property. So a patent was
issued and everything for this nested gasoline
can. Several million were procured. and shipped
overseas and assembled just like we envisioned.
And then after the war some were sold surplus and
there were some produced after the war that I was
supposed to have gotten a royalty on but I never did
get it. One of the companies that made them I, at
that time, I wasn't really interested in spending
a lot of money legally to try to get a few pennies of
can out of it. But anyway, I got a lot of
satisfaction out of it, this nested can. The only
other real projects that I was involved in, which
have kind of carried over into civilian life after
the war, I was particularly interested and
involved in aviation fuel safety, as far as the
military is concerned, and wrote some of the early
comprehensive handbooks and manuals on military
aviation fuel safety, particularly as it applies
to jet fuel, turbine fuel. because turbine fuel
is sort of a morphidite. It's not a gasoline and
it's not a kerosene. It's a mixture of both. And
military jet fuel
in the early days and even today is a very dangerous
jet fuel in that at all ambient temperatures found
on Earth, and even up to 50,000, 60,000 feet, the
vapors from JP4, which is military jet fuel, are
always in the explosive range. And military jet
fuel has an almost unknown, un-understood
characteristic of the generation of static
electricity that nobody knows why it generates so
much static electricity when it flows, when you
pump it or when you transfer it or even when you pour
it out of a can. The molecules in military jet fuel
bumping one against the other and flowing when you
pump them through a pipeline or pump them into a
tank. have the characteristic to generate static
electricity in pretty high, pretty high amounts,
pretty high voltage amounts. Which means the
possibility of fires? The possibility of
explosion and fire. And the only way to prevent it
is to properly ground both the refueling unit and
the unit being refueled. Ground them to a common
bond.
So we alerted and helped alert a lot of military
usage of the safety and the handling of jet fuel. I
then became, in the 60s, early 60s, became
involved with a civilian organization. known as
the Airways Club. It was headquartered in New York
at that time. It's now headquartered in Dallas and
known as the Airline Passengers Association.
It started out and still is a source of permanent
airline insurance. You can buy airline insurance
from Airline Passengers Association. Instead of
buying an individual policy each time, But
anyway, they ran a newsletter about airline
safety. And I made a comment to them one time about
the use of jet fuel in commercial airlines, the use
of military jet fuel in commercial airliners,
which they published in their newsletter and got
pretty wide distribution. It caused quite a furor
in civilian aviation. And a lot of people said that
I was just throwing up smoke screens to scare
people and so forth. What did it say? I said that the
use of military jet fuel in commercial airliners
was a very, very dangerous practice. And that
there was the possibility of in-flight explosion
and destruction of the aircraft. Well, I'm sorry
to say that's exactly what happened in 1961, a Pan
Am 707 returning from San Juan to Philadelphia at
an interim stop at Friendship Airport in
Baltimore. It had been refueled in San Juan with
JP4.
It flew to Friendship Airport in Baltimore and
stopped And they did not top off the main tank. The
main tank was about half full. All the tanks were
full when they left San Juan with JP4. They did not
top off the main tank, which was about half empty,
nor did they top off any of the wing tanks. The wing
tanks had been drawn down equally to keep the trim
on. Both of the wing tanks were about half full and
of course the wing tanks have a vent to the outside.
The main tank was about half full because they only
had a short distance to fly then from Baltimore to
Philadelphia. They took off from Philadelphia
with all of the tanks partially full. And they
encountered very, very severe turbulence and a
very severe electrical storm. And just a few
minutes out of Baltimore, over Elkton, Maryland,
a lightning struck the aircraft and ignited
vapors coming out of one of the vents. I think it was
a left wing tank. Ignited, and then through some
faulty arrangement of the vent or faulty
functioning of the vent valves, the fire and
explosion fed back into the tank and exploded the
left wing tank and destroyed the airplane.
Seventy, I think sixty some odd people were
killed. The FAA picked up the pieces from the early
description. It sounded like there was an
in-flight explosion. The FAA picked up the pieces
of this airplane and put them in the hangar in
Bowling Field in Washington so they could be
examined. That's what they do today in a crash is
pick up all the pieces like a jigsaw puzzle. And it
was very plain what had happened because the wing
tanks were blown out and the skin and everything
was peeled back. So it ignited and fire fed into the
main tank. And this proved, this was a living proof
of some of the theories that had been set forth
about the possibility and the hazards with
military jet fuel. So after Elkton, some of the
airlines stopped using military jet fuel. Now,
they used military jet fuel whenever they could.
for several reasons. Number one, the biggest
reason, it was cheaper. It was much cheaper than a
Jet A or Jet A-1, which were the civilian jet fuels.
You're immediately gonna say, well, why isn't the
military jet fuel as safe as the civilian jet fuel?
The answer is, at that time, and I think it's still
true today, military jet fuel is very easy to make,
very simple to make. And it's very easy to make in
the large quantities that the military would
require, or that the military air forces in the
free world would require to fight a world war.
Whereas Jet A and Jet A-1, which are really and
truly aviation kerosene, are more expensive and
we can make less of them. Out of every barrel of
crude oil, we can probably make about 20 gallons of
military jet fuel. Whereas out of every barrel of
crude oil, we can probably only make about seven
gallons of civilian jet fuel because of the mix of
the fractions that go into it. Military jet fuel is
so easy to make. You can take some of the diesel
elements and some of the gasoline elements in
storage tanks at refineries and blend them as they
load a tanker. They actually make military jet
fuel while they're loading the tanker. Pump out of
this tank, pump out of this tank, pump out of this
tank. The few additives they put in, such as
anti-corrosive and anti-water additives, add
them in. And it's all dumped into the tank and the
holes of the tanker and becomes military jet fuel,
JP-4. It's very easy to make. I know my son at Fort
McPherson in a science project, a science fair
project, I had him make military jet fuel. And he
made it in the house there, and I got him all the
little fractions, and he made it into fair. And he
showed them how I would test them. So I was much
involved in that in civilian life and even some of
it spilled over in the military when I said one day
that MATS, Military Air Transport Service,
should not fly dependents in 707s
that had JP-4 in them. And finally I said that the
White House fleet
to haul the president around and all the VIPs. One
day, I got an anonymous call and did a briefing in
the Pentagon one day. General
LeMay said, who in the hell is this guy Kinderdine
to tell us what kind of fuel we ought to use? But I got
an anonymous call one day. This was before I
retired. yeah this was in 65 or 66. And they said
you'd be very interested to know that the order was
given this morning that Air Force One and all
aircraft in the VIP fleet at Andrews henceforth
would not use JP-4 anymore.
So I told the Airways Club about it. I called New
York and told them. I said, well, the military is
starting to break now on this thing. And they
called the White House. The Airways Club called
the White House and wanted confirmation of this
rumor that was floating around that Air Force One
and all of the VIP fleet would henceforth not use
military jet fuel anymore for safety purposes.
And they refused to confirm it. They refused to
confirm or deny it. They said, we can do neither.
But in about a week, there was a little
announcement in the paper that they're going to
use it. Well, anyway, they've changed the specs a
little bit for military jet fuel. It's a little bit
safer now, but it We've lost a lot of aircraft in the
military. Where you've read aircraft exploded
shortly after takeoff or something like that
because of the volatility of JP-4. Now in your
Vita, it says that you worked on several projects
with the Alaskan and the European theaters.
And some of the projects in European theater
during the war, the
only, well after the war I did some special work in
the European theater on special purpose
facilities which included underground
facilities and the like that I probably should not
comment on.
and even within connection with some of our
allies. But I during the war then and in my my I was
assigned to service forces and did some duty with
the Third Army with Patton's group and not
long enough for my own satisfaction and Then I was
back over in Europe. I came home in late 45 and then
went back over there during the occupation in
Germany. Okay, but were you stationed in Europe or
were you stationed in Washington? I was stationed
in Washington. Throughout the whole war you were
in Washington. Most of the time I was assigned in
Washington.
And what you were doing was helping them lay the
pipe, basically? No, I had nothing to do with that.
No, this was all in... These were different. This
was all in logistic and planning and operational
things. Mostly,
well I did this before the Normandy landings, I did
a lot of work in the and the G4 annex of the landings
in Normandy. And then after that, I was in on
several projects in Europe.
I was never assigned to a specific like the umpty
umpt army or the umpty umpt brigade. I was always
assigned in a staff to the headquarters third army
or headquarters service forces Europe or
something like that.
After the war, I was back over in Europe during the
occupation. And then while I was there during the
occupation, the Berlin Airlift came along. Yeah,
in 1948. Yeah, and I was very, very much involved in
the Berlin Airlift. Okay, but before we get to the
Berlin Airlift, which I certainly want you to talk
about because it's so important. How about right
after the war was over, did you think at that time
Now you might go back to civilian life, or did you,
by that time, did you made up your mind that you
wanted to be a career officer? I had not positively
made up my mind that I wanted to be a career officer
because I had this opportunity to go to work for the
Coleman Company. What rank were you at that time? I
was a full colonel. I was a full colonel. I got my
Eagles after VE day. In fact, they were pinned on me
in Paris under the Arc de Triomphe by some of my
buddies, yeah.
I was not, I had not made up my mind that I wanted to
become a career officer because I had this this
Coleman thing. I had the possibility of another
job with this big industrialist Ludwig, you may
have heard of. He owns most of the tankers in the
world today. Has extensive operations in South
America, in mining and offices in New York. One of
my buddies went to work for him. I could have gone to
work for him and I could have also I'm pretty sure I
could have gone to work for the General American
Transportation Company that operates most of the
tank cars in the United States, that owns most of
the tank cars. What about going back to West Texas
and getting back into the oil field? I thought
about that too, but the oil business just kind of
moved so fast during the war
and the technology and everything just had
quantum jumps.
I could have gone back to Norville Wilder, the
supply house, because Lipp Norville came to
Washington and said that he wanted me to come back
here to the Fort Worth office or to their office in
Shreveport. So I, but very quickly after the war, I
made the decision, I think I'll put in for the
Regner Army, because they announced the
integration program. Why did you make that
decision? What was it about the military that was
so attractive, even though you had a number of
excellent job offers? Yeah, I don't know.
I had a lot of success during the war, a lot of
personal satisfaction. I had personal
satisfaction and personal success
that very few people, very few of my peers were able
to, I think, experience as much of as I did. And it
just kind of got me. I just liked it. And I
knew that a peacetime army or that a post-war time
army, the activities would be grossly different
from what they were during wartime.
But I felt that I could adapt to it. And I don't
really know. My folks, my wife liked the service.
What did she like about it?
I think she liked the variety about it. You know,
you stay at a place two or three years and then you go
for something else. We moved 22 times. And she
liked that. And my kids liked it. They liked the
going places and meeting new friends and new
people. My daughter went to three high schools.
She would have gone to four, but we left her in Paris
to graduate after we came home.
I think they were, I think my family was more or less
motivated and challenged by military life. And I
think particularly my son, he too wanted to study
military history. And he wanted to teach military
history. He went to Duke and went there through his
junior year. And
I said, look, what the hell can you do after you
graduate except maybe work for Hanson Baldwin or
somebody like that? And I said, why don't you get in
the business school? I said, I know Art Weimer out
in Indiana. And he's the dean of the School of
Business. And I believe you can transfer out
there. And he hadn't done too well at Duke. He's a
real good student. And I said, you can transfer out
there. And he got in a little trouble down at Duke.
And I said, why don't you just check into them and go
on out to Indiana this summer and go to summer
school and maybe you can catch up and you'll be
right even with your class then. So he did. We drove
out there. He went to summer school and he was 4-0 in
summer school. He carried a real heavy load and he
did real well. But I think they were motivated by
the service, even though they were just
youngsters right after the war. But they liked the
military, and my wife liked it. So I made the
decision and took my board, my regular Army
integration board in San Antonio, Fort Sam
Houston. Were you fearful right after the war that
you might be demoted
except those that had attained permanent rank,
and most of them were just about ready to retire. So
I was demoted to a lieutenant colonel when I was
integrated. Matter of fact, about a month before I
was integrated, and there was several thousand on
the same demotion list. And I was a lieutenant
colonel for, I guess, about five years then before
I became a colonel. Was that demoralizing in any
way? No, no, it wasn't then. No, not at all. It was,
you know, it's something that you understand in
time of war with a large force structure and why
the higher ranks are filled by rapid promotion
during the war. You could be promoted every six
months. Sure. some occasions promotions were
quicker, but normally every six months you were
promoted, almost like clockwork. And it
was an expected thing, and so there was no problem
at all to So, and I look back many times on this
thing, and I know many times, you know, nostalgia,
you think about, well, I suppose he would have gone
back in the oil business, might be a
multi-millionaire today, because some of the
guys that you worked with or started out with made
it big. But I think when you weigh everything, the
personal satisfaction and the joy and the feeling
of accomplishment that you get. I really believe
that if I had the decision to make again today, I'd
do the same thing. I really believe I would. Let's
talk now about the Berlin Arrow left. Tell me about
it. Okay. Well, I think here again, I've been awful
lucky in my military career. At this time, you were
director of supply? I was director of supply of the
largest depot in the European theater of
operations. Where was that in Germany? It's in
Gießen, Germany. It's not that now. It was then.
It's in Gießen, which is about 40 miles north of
Frankfurt, off the Autobahn, right off the
Autobahn. The G-I-E-S-S-E-N, Gießen, Gießen.
And it was a German airfield, big German airfield
that we built this depot on. It was kind of like a
saucer. And the airfield was down in the bottom of
the saucer. And of course, when it rained, the
water, we had water and mud in the depot. And I lived
in the commanding officer, the German commanding
officer's house, a nice big stucco house right in
front of the gate to the airfield. And
like I say, I was lucky. Here's a case where I
guess I was at the right place at the right time.
Because things were going from bad to worse. Would
you like a drink or a Coke or something? Yeah, I
would. Let me get that. You want a Coke or what? In
the airlift. Yeah, let's continue with the
airlift. Like I say, me personally, my personal, I
was just a lucky guy. I was at the right place at the
right time. I got a call in my office from
Heidelberg, the headquarters of the U.S. Army
Europe, about 1
o'clock, right after lunch, telling me to... go
down to Ryan Main Airport in Frankfurt, Air Base in
Frankfurt, and represent the Army at a meeting
that was going to be presided over by General
LeMay. I think he was head of the Air Force in
Europe. And of course, the tensions had been
getting stronger and stronger over access to
Berlin. The Russians had threatened and had
closed the Autobahn and the only thing that was
open was the rail line into Berlin and the air
corridor into Berlin. So I asked, I think it was the
G-4 officer, maybe it was the G-4 of the command, I
asked him what the nature was and he said, well I'm
not real sure, but it's a classified subject, it's
a classified meeting and he said you just better go
ahead and you're representing the army and he said
if there's anything real controversial that you
don't feel competent to handle, give me a ring and I
said okay, so I went and I got down there just as
quick as I could, about 40 miles, took me about an
hour to get out there and General LeMay opened a
thing by saying that General Clay, who was the
Supreme Commander then, had been contacted by the
Joint Chiefs and by the White House and was told to
be prepared to start sending aircraft into Berlin
with supplies for Berlin, for everybody in
Berlin,
And that the Air Corps, the Air Force, it was the Air
Force by the end, the Air Force had already ordered
additional transport aircraft to come to
Germany. There were some that were going to start
later that evening from as far away as Alaska, some
four-engine C-54s. Some were coming from Gwilas
in North Africa, and some were coming from
England, And even they were going to use a few C-47
twin-engine, but he hoped to use only four-engine
aircraft. And
he said, the Army is represented. And he said,
where is the Army? I had introduced myself to him
when I came in and told him I was a G-4, asked me to
represent the Army. And he said, it's going to fall
upon the Army to furnish the cargo. to fill these
airplanes up this first day. And he asked me, he
said, how much cargo can you give me? And I said,
well, General LeMay, how much would you like to
have? And that kind of put the ball back at him. And
he said, well, he said, for the first day, I'd like
to have at least 500 tons. Because I'm going to have
all my four-engine aircraft I'll be able to put
about eight to nine tons gross in those
four-engine C-54s. And depending upon what it is,
the cube and so forth of it, he said, I'm hoping that
And then, of course, we'll need more cargo each day
thereafter. But he said, tonight, I'd like to have
enough to load what aircraft that we think we're
going to be able to initiate the airlift with.
And I said, well, do you have any idea
And I said, you have no desires or no requirement or
no specification of what you want to fly. He said,
we'll leave that up to you. So I said, fine. Now, he
said, well, how much can you give me? And I said,
General LeMay, I will lay down on this airfield
tonight for you, by midnight, 500 tons of cargo. He
said, that's good enough. So I said, if I may be
excused, I'm
to my command. So I called Heidelberg and told
them. And they said, well can you do it? I said,
yeah, it'd be no problem at all. They said, well
what you gonna ship? And I said, well I haven't
really crystallized, but you know, I think I'll
ship the ingredients to make bread. Because the
easiest goddamn stuff to load. We can ship a
balanced requirement. Canned milk and yeast and
flour and sugar and And there's even in the
military ration, once a week, they bake raisin
bread. And of course, I didn't mention that. But
what I'm going to tell you in a minute or two will
bear that out. So I called. And after, they said,
that's fine. And they said, god damn, be sure you
get it there at least by 1 or 2 o'clock in the
morning. I said, it'll be here by midnight. So I
hung up.
chief of operations to stand by and I didn't know
what the hell was going to come out of this meeting.
So they were all waiting for me and I said well we
need 500 tons and I said I want you to make a run on the
on the IBM and get the tonnage and get all the all the
print out on the just divide it up and let's shift
500 tons of all the ingredients to bake the
military bread program. And they said, what? And I
said, make bread. All the ingredients to make
bread. They said, well, that's a cinch. I said, I
know it is. And I said, you better have all those DP
companies. Well, we used three or four companies
of displaced persons as laborers in the depot
there. It was so big. Still as late as 48? Yeah.
Really? There were still DP's hanging around? We
had several thousand DP's, Poles and Czechs, that
hadn't gone back. Not any Russians? No, we didn't
have any Russians. We had some Poles and DP's. And
they didn't want to go back? I don't think they
wanted to go back. Most of them were involved in the
black market and shacked up with Frauleins and
everything.
But were they working for you, or were they working
for us as labor units? And were they on payroll?
Yeah. They were living in a quasi-military
surrounding, but working for us and making a
monthly wage as labor troops. And I said, better
alert several of those truck companies in Geesen.
We had a dozen or so truck companies that were all
black truck companies.